keps/127: Support User Namespaces (#3)
kinvolk/kubernetes-enhancements: keps/sig-node/127-usernamespaces-support/README.md

ID mappings used for that container. For example, if the user 0 in the container
is mapped to the host user 100000, then the `/root` directory has to be owned by
user ID 100000 in the host, so it appears to belong to root in the container.
The current implementation in container runtimes is to recursively perform a
`chown` operation over the image snapshot when it's pulled. This presents a risk
as it potentially increases the time and the storage needed to handle the
container images.

There is not immediate mitigation for it, [we
talked](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/containers/2020-September/042230.html)
to the Linux kernel community and [they
replied](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/containers/2020-September/042230.html)
they are working on a solution for it. If the Linux kernel provides a solution
for this problem, that would be something that container runtimes should use. It
does not impact the kubelet nor the CRI gRPC spec.

Another risk is exausting the disk space on the nodes if pods are repeativily
started and stopped while using `Pod` mode. Since `Pod` mode is planned for

> phase 2 we haven't considered a mitigation for this case.

Reviewer: We need a section on impact to image gc and rootfs for all cases.

Author: I changed this section a bit based on our meeting and put a new section about garbage collection in the Pod mode -> https://github.com/kinvolk/kubernetes-enhancements/pull/3/commits/6093bac774d4c76f3c417a93e69021d21ee33679

Please let me know if that's what you meant.

   // uid_mappings is an array of user ID mappings.
   repeated LinuxIDMapping uid_mappings = 1;
   // gid_mappings is an array of group ID mappings.
   repeated LinuxIDMapping gid_mappings = 2;
}

// NamespaceOption provides options for Linux namespaces.
message NamespaceOption {
    ...
    // User namespace for this container/sandbox.
    // Note: There is currently no way to set CONTAINER scoped user namespace in the Kubernetes API.
    // Namespaces currently set by the kubelet: POD, NODE
    Namespace user = 5;
    // ID mappings to use when the user namespace mode is POD.
    LinuxUserNamespaceConfig mappings = 6;
}
```

### PodSpec Changes

`v1.PodSpec` is extended with a new `UserNamespaceMode` field:

```
const (
	UserNamespaceModeHost    PodUserNamespaceMode = "Host"
	UserNamespaceModeCluster PodUserNamespaceMode = "Cluster"
)

type PodSpec struct {
...
  // UserNamespaceMode controls how user namespaces are used for this Pod.
  // Three modes are supported:
  // "Host": The pod shares the host user namespace. (default value).
  // "Cluster": The pod uses a cluster-wide configured ID mappings.
  // +k8s:conversion-gen=false
  // +optional

>   UserNamespaceMode PodUserNamespaceMode `json:"userNamespaceMode,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,36,opt  name=userNamespaceMode"`

Reviewer: This should be under the security context for the pod.

Author: I put it there because other similar fields like `host{Network, IPC, PID}` are at the `PodSpec` level. I don't have a strong opinion but I find it a bit "weird" to control some namespaces at one level and the others in a different level.

style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

Container security consists of many different kernel features that work together
to make containers secure. User namespaces isolate user and group IDs by
allowing processes to run with different IDs in the container and in the host.
Specially, a process running as privileged in a container can be
unprivileged in the host. This makes it possible to give more capabilities to the containers and
protects the host and other containers from malicious or compromised containers.

This KEP adds a new `userNamespaceMode` field  to `pod.Spec`. It allows users to
place pods in different user namespaces increasing the  pod-to-pod and
pod-to-host isolation. This extra isolation increases the cluster security as it
protects the host and other pods from malicious or compromised processes inside
containers that are able to break into the host. This KEP proposes three

> different modes: `Host` keeps the current behaviour, `Cluster` uses the same

Reviewer: I think we should be more specific that `Host` means use the host user namespace like the current default behavior.

Author: Done in https://github.com/kinvolk/kubernetes-enhancements/pull/3/commits/c674127b6c10453aa75d0c665551a9ebcb3f7bcf.

demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

From [user_namespaces(7)](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/user_namespaces.7.html):
> User namespaces isolate security-related identifiers and attributes, in
particular, user IDs and group IDs, the root directory, keys, and capabilities.
A process's user and group IDs can be different inside and outside a user
namespace. In particular, a process can have a normal unprivileged user ID
outside a user namespace while at the same time having a user ID of 0 inside
the namespace; in other words, the process has full privileges for operations
inside the user namespace, but is unprivileged for operations outside the
namespace.

The goal of supporting user namespaces in Kubernetes is to be able to run
processes in pods with a different user and group IDs than in the host.
Specifically, a privileged process in the pod runs as an unprivileged process in the
host. If such a process is able to break out of the container to the host, it'll have limited
impact as it'll be running as an unprivileged user there.

> The following security vulnerabilities are mitigated with

Reviewer: are -> were

user namespaces and it is expected that using them would mitigate against some of the future vulnerabilities.
- CVE-2016-8867: Privilege escalation inside containers
  - https://github.com/moby/moby/issues/27590
- CVE-2018-15664: TOCTOU race attack that allows to read/write files in the host
  - https://github.com/moby/moby/pull/39252
- CVE-2019-5736: Host runc binary can be overwritten from container
  - https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/commit/0a8e4117e7f715d5fbeef398405813ce8e88558b

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

- Increase node to pod isolation in Kubernetes by mapping user and group IDs
  inside the container to different IDs in the host. In particular, mapping root
  inside the container to unprivileged user and group IDs in the node.
- Make it safer to run workloads that need highly privileged capabilities such as
  `CAP_SYS_ADMIN`, reducing the risk of impacting the host.

> - Benefit from the security hardening that user namespaces are expected to

Reviewer: we can drop `are expected to`

  provide against some of the future unknown runtime and kernel vulnerabilities.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

- Provide a way to run the kubelet process or container runtimes as an
  unprivileged process. Although initiatives like
  [usernetes](https://github.com/rootless-containers/usernetes) and this KEP
  both make use of user namespaces, it is a different implementation for a
  different purpose.

> - Supporting a shiftfs or similar solution once it's available in the kernel.

Reviewer: `Supporting shiftfs or a similar .. `

  they will run with the same effective IDs on the host, allowing them to read
  and write files in the shared storage.

- **Pod**:
  Each pod is placed in a different user namespace and has a different and
  non-overlapping ID mapping. This mode is intended for stateless pods, i.e.
  pods using only ephemeral volumes like `configMap,` `downwardAPI`, `secret`,
  `projected` and `emptyDir`. This mode not only provides host-to-pod isolation
  but also  pod-to-pod isolation as each pod has a different range of effective
  IDs in the host.

### User Stories

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

As a cluster admin, I want run some pods with privileged capabilities because
the applications in the pods require it (e.g. `CAP_SYS_ADMIN` to mount a FUSE
filesystem or `CAP_NET_ADMIN` to setup a VPN) but I don't want this extra
capability to grant me any extra privilege on the host.

#### Story 2

> As a cluster admin, I want to allow some pods to share the host user namespace

Reviewer: `to share` -> `to run in the` ?

if they need a feature only available in such user namespace, such as loading a kernel module with `CAP_SYS_MODULE`.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

#### Volumes Support

The Linux kernel uses the effective user and group IDs (the ones the host) to
check the file access permissions. Since with user namespaces IDs are mapped to
a different value on the host, this causes issues accessing volumes if the
pod is run with a different mapping, i.e. the effective user and group IDs on
the host change.

> This proposal supports volume without changing the user and group IDs and leaves

Reviewer: `volumes`

In regard to this proposal, volumes can be divided in ephemeral and non-ephemeral.

Ephemeral volumes are associated to a **single** pod and their lifecyle is
dependent on that pod. These are `configMap`, `secret`, `emptyDir`,
`downwardAPI`, etc. These kind of volumes can work with any of the three
different modes of `userNamespaceMode` as they are not shared by different pods
and hence all the processes accessing those volumes have the same effective user
and group IDs. Kubelet creates the files for those volumes and it can easily set
the file ownership too.

Non-ephemeral volumes are more difficult to support since they can be persistent
and shared by multiple pods. This proposal supports volumes with two different
strategies:
- The `Cluster` mode makes it easier for pods to share files using volumes when those
  don't have access permissions for `others` because the effective user and
  group IDs on the host are the same for all the pods.
- The semantics of semantics of `fsGroup` are respected, if it's specified it's
  assumed to be the correct GID in the host and a 1-to-1 mapping entry for the
  `fsGroup` is added to the GID mappings for the pod.

> This KEP doesn't impose any restriction on the different volumes and

Reviewer: We should add examples on how users would achieve that with the current proposal.

Author: I reworded that section a bit on https://github.com/kinvolk/kubernetes-enhancements/pull/3/commits/78bfe606ec447025de706b8dc516c0cf0d675fd6.

owned by a user different than the effective user of that process in a volume
that doesn't support the semantics of `fsGroup` (doesn't support
[`SetVolumeOwnership`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/00da04ba23d755d02a78d5021996489ace96aa4d/pkg/volume/volume_linux.go#L42)
that updates permissions and ownership of the files to be accesible by the
`fsGroup` group ID). Such pods should be run in `Host` mode.

#### Container Runtime Support

- **Docker**:
Docker only supports a [single ID
  mappings](https://docs.docker.com/engine/security/userns-remap/) shared by all
  containers running in the host. There is not support for [multiple ID
  mappings](https://github.com/moby/moby/issues/28593) yet. Dockershim runtime
  is only compatible with pods running in `Host` and `Cluster` modes. The user
  has to guarantee that the ID mappings configured in Docker through the
  `userns-remap` parameter and the cluster-wide range configured in the kubelet
  are the same. The dockershim implementation includes a check to verify that
  the IDs mapping received from the kubelet are equal to the ones configured in

>   Docker, returning an error otherwise.

Reviewer: Let's add a statement that making changes to dockershim is out of scope.

Author: Done in https://github.com/kinvolk/kubernetes-enhancements/pull/3/commits/2efb472df6145a0398980a48987d5a8f4ab98612

  The list of such capabilities is likely to change from one Linux version to
  another. For example, Linux now has [time
  namespaces](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/time_namespaces.7.html) and
  there are ways to make `CAP_SYS_TIME` work inside a user namespace. There are
  also discussions to make `CAP_MKNOD` work in user namespaces.

- **Sharing Host Namespaces**:
  There are some limitations in the Linux kernel and in the runtimes that
  prevent sharing other host namespaces when the host user namespace is not
  shared.
  - Mounting `mqueue` (`/dev/mqueue`) is not allowed from a process in a user
    namespace that does not own the IPC namespace. Pods with `hostIPC=true` and
    `userNamespaceMode=Pod|Cluster` can fail.
  - Mounting `procfs` (`/proc`) is not allowed from a process in a user namespace
    that does not own the PID namespace. Pods with `hostPID=true` and
    `userNamespaceMode=Pod|Cluster` can fail.
  - Mounting `sysfs` (`/sys`) is not allowed from a process in a user namespace
    that does not own the network namespace. Impact: pods with
    `hostNetwork=true` and `userNamespaceMode=Pod|Cluster` can fail.

>   If users specify `userNamespaceMode=Pod|Cluster` and one of these

Reviewer: We could consider adding a feature gate for default to `Host` for such namespaces. What do you think?

Author: I added some comments about it here: https://github.com/kinvolk/kubernetes-enhancements/tree/mauricio/userns_proposal_new/keps/sig-node/127-usernamespaces-support#host-defaulting-mechanishm

Some of my concerns/motivations to not have it are:
- It's not needed in this proposal as we plan to have `Host` mode by default.
- That logic will tie Kubernetes with details of the runtimes / kernel. What happen if the runtime / kernel evolves? (for instance, `CAP_SYS_TIME ` can be used with user namespaces in newer kernels) or if the user runs another runtime supporting it?. 
- I think we should avoid making decisions by the users, specially in this regard that could change over time. 

I think a similar mechanism could be useful once we want to make `Pod` the default. It could default to host in those cases and indicate the user they have to update their templates because they'll broke in a future release. I don't know how this could fit with feature gates as I think it should be something temporal until users update their templates. I was trying to avoid this discussion as it seems a bit complicated to me. Please let me know if it's something we should investigate more.

operation updating only the metadata, like `chown` or `chmod`, is performed.
This solution could be adopted by other runtimes until a more sophisticated
approach is implemented in the kernel. [We
talked](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/containers/2020-September/042230.html)
to the Linux kernel community and [they
replied](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/containers/2020-September/042230.html)
they are working on a solution for it. If the Linux kernel provides a solution
for this problem, that would be something that container runtimes should use. It
does not impact the kubelet nor the CRI gRPC spec.

#### Container Images with High IDs

There are container images designed to run with high user and group IDs. It's
possible that the IDs range assigned to the pod is not big enough to accommodate
these IDs, in this case they will be mapped to the `nobody` user in the host.

It's not a big problem in the `Cluster` case, the users have to be sure that
they provide a range accommodating these IDs. It's more difficult to handle in
the `Pod` case as the logic to allocate the ranges for each pod has to take this

> information in consideration. It's likely that this requires some changes to the

Reviewer: We can call this out as a later phase item.

Author: I added it here https://github.com/kinvolk/kubernetes-enhancements/tree/mauricio/userns_proposal_new/keps/sig-node/127-usernamespaces-support#future-phases under the "High IDs in Container Images" title. Please let me know if it is what you're referring to.

that it should be done in small steps to avoid losing the focus on the
discussion. It's also true that a full plan should be agreed at the beginning to
avoid changing the implementation drastically in further phases.

This proposal implementation aims to be divided in the following phases:

### Phase 1

This first phase includes:
 - Extend the PodSpec with the `userNamespaceMode` field.
 - Extend the CRI with user and ID mappings fields.
 - Implement support for `Host` and `Cluster` user namespace modes.

The goal of this phase is to implement some initial user namespace support
providing pod-to-host isolation and supporting volumes. The implementation of
the `Pod` mode is out of scope in this phase because it requires a non
negligible amount of work and we could risk losing the focus failing to deliver
this feature.

### Future Phases

These phases aim to implement the `Pod` mode. After these phases are completed the
full advantanges of user namespaces can be used in some cases (stateless
workloads).

There are some things that have to be studied with more detail for these
phase(s) but are not needed for phase 1, hence they are not discussed in detail:

> - **Pod Default Mode**:

Reviewer: We should add a section on metacopyup here.

Author: Done in https://github.com/kinvolk/kubernetes-enhancements/pull/3/commits/bd9d2efbcf2580c404f717c02821d258c6d98c52. Please let me know if that's ok.

when drafting this test plan.

[testing-guidelines]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-testing/testing.md
-->

TBD

### Graduation Criteria

<!--
**Note:** *Not required until targeted at a release.*

Define graduation milestones.

These may be defined in terms of API maturity, or as something else. The KEP
should keep this high-level with a focus on what signals will be looked at to
determine graduation.

Consider the following in developing the graduation criteria for this enhancement:
- [Maturity levels (`alpha`, `beta`, `stable`)][maturity-levels]
- [Deprecation policy][deprecation-policy]

Clearly define what graduation means by either linking to the [API doc
definition](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/kubernetes-api/#api-versioning)
or by redefining what graduation means.

In general we try to use the same stages (alpha, beta, GA), regardless of how the
functionality is accessed.

[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/

> Below are some examples to consider, in addition to the aforementioned [maturity levels][maturity-levels].

Reviewer: We can add Alpha criteria as the Phase 1 work including implentation and support in CRI-O and containerd.

Author: What about beta, should it include support for `Pod` mode?

Reviewer: Pod could be `v1alpha2`.

easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

Container security consists of many different kernel features that work together
to make containers secure. User namespaces isolate user and group IDs by
allowing processes to run with different IDs in the container and in the host.
Specially, a process running as privileged in a container can be
unprivileged in the host. This makes it possible to give more capabilities to the containers and
protects the host and other containers from malicious or compromised containers.

This KEP adds a new `userNamespaceMode` field  to `pod.Spec`. It allows users to
place pods in different user namespaces increasing the  pod-to-pod and
pod-to-host isolation. This extra isolation increases the cluster security as it
protects the host and other pods from malicious or compromised processes inside
containers that are able to break into the host. This KEP proposes three
different modes: `Host` uses the host user namespace like the current behaviour, `Cluster` uses the same

> ID mapping for all the pods (very similar to the previous [Support Node-Level User

Author: I did something close to your suggestion in https://github.com/kinvolk/kubernetes-enhancements/pull/3/commits/2cc1ee38a82b95c01fa36e2ab9db9cbe6941d57e.

> Namespaces

Author: I'll reformat the whole text before going upstream. I wanted to avoid mixing content and format related changes in the same commits to make review easier.

Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

#### Breaking Existing Workloads

Some features that don't work when the host user namespace is not shared are:

- **Some Capabilities**:
  The Linux kernel takes into consideration the user namespace a process is
  running in while performing the capabilities check. There are some
  capabilities that are only available in the initial (host) user namespace such as
  `CAP_SYS_TIME`, `CAP_SYS_MODULE` & `CAP_MKNOD`.

  If a pod is given one of those capabilities it will still be deployed, but the
  capability will be ineffective and processes using those capabilities will
  fail. This is not impacting the implementation in Kubernetes. If users need
  the capability to be effective, they should use `userNamespaceMode=Host`.

  The list of such capabilities is likely to change from one Linux version to
  another. For example, Linux now has [time
  namespaces](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/time_namespaces.7.html) and
  there are ways to make `CAP_SYS_TIME` work inside a user namespace. There are

>   also discussions to make `CAP_MKNOD` work in user namespaces.

Reviewer 2: If this KEP is implemented as propossed, I assume CAP_SYS_TIME will just work withon any need to patch Kubernetes/containerd, right? Just checking :)

- **Sharing Host Namespaces**:
  There are some limitations in the Linux kernel and in the runtimes that
  prevent sharing other host namespaces when the host user namespace is not
  shared.
  - Mounting `mqueue` (`/dev/mqueue`) is not allowed from a process in a user
    namespace that does not own the IPC namespace. Pods with `hostIPC=true` and
    `userNamespaceMode=Pod|Cluster` can fail.
  - Mounting `procfs` (`/proc`) is not allowed from a process in a user namespace
    that does not own the PID namespace. Pods with `hostPID=true` and
    `userNamespaceMode=Pod|Cluster` can fail.
  - Mounting `sysfs` (`/sys`) is not allowed from a process in a user namespace
    that does not own the network namespace. Impact: pods with
    `hostNetwork=true` and `userNamespaceMode=Pod|Cluster` can fail.

  If users specify `userNamespaceMode=Pod|Cluster` and one of these
  `host{IPC,PID,Network}=true` options, runc will currently fail to start the

>   container. The kubelet does **not** try to prevent that combination of options,

Reviewer 2: Should we clarify how the error is shown?

  // "Host": The pod shares the host user namespace. (default value).
  // "Cluster": The pod uses a cluster-wide configured ID mappings.
  // +k8s:conversion-gen=false
  // +optional
  UserNamespaceMode PodUserNamespaceMode `json:"userNamespaceMode,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,36,opt  name=userNamespaceMode"`
...
```

#### Option 2: PodSecurityContext

Add it to `v1.PodSpec.PodSecurityContext` as this field controls a security
aspect of the pod.

```
const (
	UserNamespaceModeHost    PodUserNamespaceMode = "Host"
	UserNamespaceModeCluster PodUserNamespaceMode = "Cluster"
)

type PodSecurityContext struct {
...
  // UserNamespaceMode controls how user namespaces are used for this Pod.
  // Three modes are supported:
  // "Host": The pod shares the host user namespace. (default value).
  // "Cluster": The pod uses a cluster-wide configured ID mappings.
  // +optional
  UserNamespaceMode PodUserNamespaceMode `json:"userNamespaceMode,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,11,opt  name=userNamespaceMode"`
...
```
<<[/UNRESOLVED]>>

### Configuring the Cluster ID Mappings

This proposal considers two different ways to configure the ID mappings used for the `Cluster` mode.

> This is for discussion with the community and only one will be considered.

Reviewer 2: nit-picking: Changing considered (seems confusing using it 2 times) to used.
```suggestion
This is for discussion with the community and, of course, only one will be used.
```

The `fsGroup` is asssumed to be the correct group owner of the files present on
the volumes. A 1-to-1 ID mapping is added to ensure that the same GID used in
the container is the effective GID in the host when the fsGroup is defined. If
the `fsGroup` is part of the cluster ID mappings, a hole is "punched", otherwise
an extra one element ID mapping is added.

For instance, if the cluster GID mappings are

```
ContainerID HostID Size
0           1000   0
```
and there is a pod with `fsGroup: 500`, the GID mappings for that specific pod
are

```
ContainerID HostID Size
0           1000   500
501         1501   499
500         500    1
```

On the other hand, if a pod has `fsGroup: 3000`, the GID mappings for that pod are

```
ContainerID HostID Size
0           1000   1000
3000        3000   1
```

### Updating Ownership of Ephemeral Volumes

Ephemeral volumes use
[`AtomicWriter`](https://github.com/kinvolk/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/volume/util/atomic_writer.go)
to create the files that are mounted to the containers. This component [has some
logic](https://github.com/kinvolk/kubernetes/blob/c94242a7b1d238cc27aea9b6d45ccb9963e814bb/pkg/volume/util/atomic_writer.go#L403)

> to update the ownership of those files in some cases. It can be extended to take

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 to update the ownership of those files in some cases. It will be extended to take
```

#### Alpha -> Beta Graduation

- Gather feedback from developers and surveys
- Complete features A, B, C
- Tests are in Testgrid and linked in KEP

#### Beta -> GA Graduation

- N examples of real-world usage
- N installs
- More rigorous forms of testing—e.g., downgrade tests and scalability tests
- Allowing time for feedback

**Note:** Generally we also wait at least two releases between beta and
GA/stable, because there's no opportunity for user feedback, or even bug reports,
in back-to-back releases.

#### Removing a Deprecated Flag

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing flag
- Two versions passed since introducing the functionality that deprecates the flag (to address version skew)
- Address feedback on usage/changed behavior, provided on GitHub issues
- Deprecate the flag

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
[conformance tests].**

[conformance tests]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md
-->

#### Alpha

- [ ] Support for `Cluster` and `Host` modes implemented.
- [ ] Support implemented in CRI-O.
- [ ] Support implemented in containerd.
- [ ] Unit test coverage.

> - [ ] Support for `Pod` mode discused and implemented.

Reviewer 2: Support pod mode for alpha? Isn't this part of phase 2?

Reviewer: We can have multiple alphas

Reviewer: All modes need soak time in alpha before we move to beta.

- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

### Version Skew Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component handle version skew with other
components? What are the guarantees? Make sure this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing a version skew strategy for this
enhancement:
- Does this enhancement involve coordinating behavior in the control plane and
  in the kubelet? How does an n-2 kubelet without this feature available behave
  when this feature is used?
- Will any other components on the node change? For example, changes to CSI,
  CRI or CNI may require updating that component before the kubelet.
-->

The container runtime will have to be updated in the nodes to support this feature.

The new `user` field in the `NamespaceOption` will be ignored by an old runtime
without user namespaces support. The container will be placed in the host user
namespace. It's a responsibility of the user to guarantee that a runtime
supporting user namespaces is used when this feature is enabled.

> An old version of kubelet without user namespaces support can cause some

Reviewer 2: old version of the kubelet with new version of container runtime, I guess? Can we clarify what is the version skew in this case?

Author: Clarified here https://github.com/kinvolk/kubernetes-enhancements/pull/3/commits/2392a05f9e67ac4532d2d89762885ebcafe42476.

is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.

-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

* **How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?**
  - [X] Feature gate
    - Feature gate name: UserNamespacesSupport
    - Components depending on the feature gate: kubelet

* **Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?**
  The default mode for usernamespaces is `Host`, so the default behaviour is not changed.

* **Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back
  the enablement)?**
  Yes, by disabling the `UserNamespacesSupport` feature gate.
  The effective user and group IDs of the process in the host would be different
  before and after disabling the feature for pods running in `Cluster` and `Pod`
  modes. This can cause access issues to pods accessing files saved in

>   volumes.

Reviewer 2: I guess all pods need to be re-created also, as they will continue to run in the usernamespace otherwise. Am I missing something?

Author: Handled in https://github.com/kinvolk/kubernetes-enhancements/pull/3/commits/fd1a6da107ef54a4ed28bac47f5012f192482dd0

* **What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?**
  The situation is very similar to the described above. The pod will be able to
  access the files written when the feature was enabled but can have issues to

>   access those files written while the feature was disabled.

Reviewer 2: Idem, I think all pods need to be re-created for the feature flag to take effect

  `host{IPC,PID,Network}=true` options, runc will currently fail to start the
  container. The kubelet does **not** try to prevent that combination of
  options, in case runc or the kernel make it possible in the future to use that
  combination.

In order to avoid breaking existing workloads `Host` is the default value of
`userNamespaceMode`.

#### Duplicated Snapshots of Container Images

The owners of the files of a container image have to been set accordingly to the
ID mappings used for that container. For example, if the user 0 in the container
is mapped to the host user 100000, then the `/root` directory has to be owned by
user ID 100000 in the host, so it appears to belong to root in the container.
The current implementation in container runtimes is to recursively perform a
`chown` operation over the image snapshot when it's pulled. This presents a risk
as it potentially increases the time and the storage needed to handle the
container images.

Some runtimes, like cri-o, mitigate these problems by using the `metacopy`
option of overlayfs. This option avoids copying the whole file content when an
operation updating only the metadata, like `chown` or `chmod`, is performed.

> This solution could be adopted by other runtimes until a more sophisticated

Reviewer 3: ```
Metadata only copy up
--------------------

When metadata only copy up feature is enabled, overlayfs will only copy
up metadata (as opposed to whole file), when a metadata specific operation
like chown/chmod is performed. Full file will be copied up later when
file is opened for WRITE operation.
```
Container/storage used by CRI-O mounts an overlay file system with the metacopy=on flag set, it then chowns all of the lower files in the image to match the user namespace to which the container will run. This operation is very quick compared to standard chowning, since none of the files data has to be copied up.  If a second container runs on the same image with the same user namespace, then the chowned image is shared, eliminating the need to chown again.

  - https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/commit/0a8e4117e7f715d5fbeef398405813ce8e88558b

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

- Increase node to pod isolation in Kubernetes by mapping user and group IDs
  inside the container to different IDs in the host. In particular, mapping root
  inside the container to unprivileged user and group IDs in the node.
- Make it safer to run workloads that need highly privileged capabilities such
  as `CAP_SYS_ADMIN`, reducing the risk of impacting the host.
- Benefit from the security hardening that user namespaces provide against some
  of the future unknown runtime and kernel vulnerabilities.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

- Provide a way to run the kubelet process or container runtimes as an
  unprivileged process. Although initiatives like
  [usernetes](https://github.com/rootless-containers/usernetes) and this KEP
  both make use of user namespaces, it is a different implementation for a
  different purpose.

> - Supporting shiftfs or a similar solution once it's available in the kernel.

Reviewer: I probably would drop this since if it lands we will support it for sure as it would solve lot of the issues with user namespaces.

Author: Makes sense.

#### Story 1

As a cluster admin, I want run some pods with privileged capabilities because
the applications in the pods require it (e.g. `CAP_SYS_ADMIN` to mount a FUSE
filesystem or `CAP_NET_ADMIN` to setup a VPN) but I don't want this extra
capability to grant me any extra privilege on the host.

#### Story 2

As a cluster admin, I want to allow some pods to run in the host user namespace
if they need a feature only available in such user namespace, such as loading a
kernel module with `CAP_SYS_MODULE`.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

#### Volumes Support

The Linux kernel uses the effective user and group IDs (the ones the host) to
check the file access permissions. Since with user namespaces IDs are mapped to
a different value on the host, this causes issues accessing volumes if the pod
is run with a different mapping, i.e. the effective user and group IDs on the
host change.

This proposal supports volumes without changing the user and group IDs and

> leaves that problem to the user to manage. Future Linux kernel features such as

Reviewer: nit: `for the user to manage`

shiftfs could allow different pods to see a volume with its own IDs but it is

> out of scope of this proposal. Among the possible future kernel solutions, we

Reviewer: but is not available yet.

shared volume containing files and folders with permissions for `others`, it can
run in `Pod` mode. On the other hand, a process inside a pod will not be able to
access files with mode `0700` and owned by a user different than the effective
user of that process in a volume that doesn't support the semantics of `fsGroup`
(doesn't support
[`SetVolumeOwnership`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/00da04ba23d755d02a78d5021996489ace96aa4d/pkg/volume/volume_linux.go#L42)
that updates permissions and ownership of the files to be accesible by the
`fsGroup` group ID). Such pods should be run in `Host` mode.

#### Container Runtime Support

- **Docker**:
  Docker only supports a [single ID
  mappings](https://docs.docker.com/engine/security/userns-remap/) shared by all
  containers running in the host. There is not support for [multiple ID
  mappings](https://github.com/moby/moby/issues/28593) yet. Updating dockershim
  is out of scope of this KEP as [it's going to be
  deprecated]((https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/1985/)) and it
  offers a very limited support for user namespaces.
- **containerd**:

>   It's quite straigtforward to implement the CRI changes proposed below in

Reviewer: typo: straightforward

Author: Good eye!

  containerd/cri, we did it in
  [this](https://github.com/kinvolk/containerd-cri/commits/mauricio/userns_poc)
  PoC.
- **cri-o**:
  CRI-O recently [added](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/pull/3944) support for
  user namespaces through a pod annotation. The extensions to make it work with
  the CRI changes proposed here are small.

> - gVisor, katacontainers: It's still to investigate.

Reviewer: `Yet to be investigated`

negligible amount of work and we could risk losing the focus failing to deliver
this feature.

### Future Phases

These phases aim to implement the `Pod` mode. After these phases are completed
the full advantanges of user namespaces can be used in some cases (stateless
workloads).

There are some things that have to be studied with more detail for these
phase(s) but are not needed for phase 1, hence they are not discussed in detail:

- **Pod Default Mode**:
  It's not clear yet what should be the process to make this happen as this is a
  potentially non backwards compatible change. It's specially relevant for
  workloads not compatible with user namespaces. A [host defaulting
  mechanishm](#host-defaulting-mechanishm) can help to make this transition
  smoother.
- **Duplicated Container Images Snapshots and Garbage Collection**:
  The `Pod` mode makes it more difficult to handle the [duplicated
  snapshots](#duplicated-snapshots-of-container-images) issue as it's possible
  that a pod uses a unique ID mapping each time it's scheduled. The different
  runtimes will have to use solutions like `metacopy` option of overlayfs or new

>   kernel features to overcome it. It's also likely that the garbage collection

Reviewer: kubelet image garbage collection

### Monitoring Requirements

Will be added before transition to beta.

* **How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?**

* **What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine
the health of the service?**

* **What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the above SLIs?**

* **Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability
of this feature?**

### Dependencies

* **Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?**: No.

### Scalability

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?** No.

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?** No.

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud
provider?** No.

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of
the existing API objects?** Yes. The PodSpec will be increased.

* **Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any
operations covered by [existing SLIs/SLOs]?**
  Yes. The startup latency of both stateless and stateful pods is increased as

>   the rhe runtime has to set correct ownership for the container image before

Reviewer: rhe?

- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

Container security consists of many different kernel features that work together
to make containers secure. User namespaces isolate user and group IDs by
allowing processes to run with different IDs in the container and in the host.
Specially, a process running as privileged in a container can be seen as
unprivileged in the host. This gives more capabilities to the containers and
protects the host from malicious or compromised containers.

This KEP is a continuation of the work initiated in the [Support Node-Level User
Namespaces
Remapping](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/design-proposals/node/node-usernamespace-remapping.md)

> proposal.

Author: I improved the summary in https://github.com/kinvolk/kubernetes-enhancements/pull/3/commits/742abd2e6134a1042506ed5cf53d6e8a8df478ef, please let know what you think about it.

> proposal.

Reviewer 2: LGTM, thanks!

> ## Motivation

Author: I added them back.

> ## Motivation

Reviewer 2: Thanks!

From [user_namespaces(7)](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/user_namespaces.7.html):
> User namespaces isolate security-related identifiers and attributes, in
particular, user IDs and group IDs, the root directory, keys, and capabilities.
A process's user and group IDs can be different inside and outside a user
namespace. In particular, a process can have a normal unprivileged user ID
outside a user namespace while at the same time having a user ID of 0 inside
the namespace; in other words, the process has full privileges for operations
inside the user namespace, but is unprivileged for operations outside the
namespace.

The goal of supporting user namespaces in Kubernetes is to be able to run
processes in pods with a different user and group IDs than in the host.

> Speficically, a privileged process in the pod runs as an unprivileged process in the

Author: Solved manually before seeing your suggestion.

host. If such a process is able to break into the host, it'll have limited
impact as it'll be running as an unprivileged user there.

There have been some security vulnerabilities that could have been mitigated by
user namespaces. Some examples are:
- CVE-2016-8867: Privilege escalation inside containers
  - https://github.com/moby/moby/issues/27590
- CVE-2018-15664: TOCTOU race attack that allows to read/write files in the host
  - https://github.com/moby/moby/pull/39252
- CVE-2019-5736: Host runc binary can be overwritten from container
  - https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/commit/0a8e4117e7f715d5fbeef398405813ce8e88558b

### Goals

> - Increase node to pod isolation in Kubernetes by mapping user and group IDs
>   inside the container to different IDs in the host. In particular, mapping root
>   inside the container to unprivileged user and group IDs in the node.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Increase node to pod isolation in Kubernetes by mapping user and group IDs
  inside the container to different IDs in the host. In particular, mapping root
  inside the container to unprivileged user and group IDs in the node.
- Making it possible to run workloads that need "dangerous" capabilities such as `CAP_SYS_ADMIN` without impacting the host.
- Benefit from the security hardening that user namespaces are expected to provide against some of the future unknown runtime vulnerabilities
```

### Non-Goals

> TODO(Mauricio)

Reviewer 4: - Provide a way to run the Kubelet process or container runtimes as an unprivileged process. Although initiatives like [usernetes](https://github.com/rootless-containers/usernetes) and this KEP both make use of user namespaces, it is a different implementation for a different purpose.
- Mounting volumes in pods with a user id mapping. Although the authors of this KEP would like to have this feature in the future, this is out of scope of this KEP. The complexity of this would probably require to write a separate KEP.

Author: Thanks!

Reviewer 4: @rata I didn't mean the "POD" mode. I meant that the podSpec could have some options about the mounts to automatically shift the user ids with shiftfs or something else:

```
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: web
        image: nginx
        volumeMounts:
            - name: nfs
              mountPath: "/usr/share/nginx/html"
              shiftfs: "0 10000 65534"
      volumes:
      - name: nfs
        persistentVolumeClaim:
          claimName: nfs
```

This kind of features is out of scope / not a goal in this KEP.

## Proposal

This proposal aims to support user namespaces in Kubernetes by extending the pod
specification with a new `userNamespaceMode` field. This proposal aims to
support three modes.

- **Host**:
  The pods are placed in the host user namespace, this is the current Kubernetes
  behaviour. This mode is intended for pods that only work in the root (host)
  user namespace. It is the default mode when `userNamespaceMode` field is not
  set.

- **Cluster**:
  All the pods in the cluster are placed in a different user namespace but they
  use the same ID mappings. This mode doesn't provide full pod-to-pod isolation
  as all the pods with `Cluster` mode have the same effective IDs on the host.
  It provides pod-to-host isolation as the IDs are different inside the
  container and in the host. This mode is intended for pods sharing volumes as
  they will run with the same effective IDs on the host, allowing them to read
  and write files in the shared storage.

- **Pod**:
  Each pod is placed in a different user namespace and has a different and

>   non-overlapping ID mappings. This mode is intended for stateless pods, i.e.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  non-overlapping ID mapping. This mode is intended for stateless pods, i.e.
```

  pods using only ephemeral volumes like `configMap,` `downwardAPI`, `secret`,
  `projected` and `emptyDir`. This mode not only provides host-to-pod isolation
  but also  pod-to-pod isolation as each pod has a different range of effective
  IDs in the host.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a cluster admin, I want run some pods with privileged capabilities because
the applications in the pods require it (e.g. `CAP_SYS_ADMIN` to mount a FUSE
filesystem or `CAP_NET_ADMIN` to setup a VPN) but I don't want this extra
capability to give any extra privilege on the host.

#### Story 2

As a cluster admin, I want to allow some pods to share the host user namespace

> if they need a feature only available in such user namespace.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
if they need a feature only available in such user namespace, such as loading a kernel module with `CAP_SYS_MODULE`.
```

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats

#### Volumes Support

The Linux kernel uses the effective user and group IDs (the ones the host) to
check the file access permissions. Since with user namespaces IDs are mapped to
a different value on the host, this could cause issues accessing volumes if the
pod is run with a different mapping, i.e. the effective user and group IDs on
the host change.

This proposal supports volume without changing the user and group IDs and leaves
that problem to the user to manage. Future Linux kernel features such as shiftfs
could allow to different pods to see a volume with its own IDs but it is out of
scope of this proposal. Among the possible future kernel solutions, we can list:

- [shiftfs: uid/gid shifting filesystem](https://lwn.net/Articles/757650/)
- [A new API for mounting filesystems](https://lwn.net/Articles/753473/)
- [user_namespace: introduce fsid mappings](https://lwn.net/Articles/812221/)

> In regard to this proposal, volumes can be divided in ephemeral and non-ephemeral.

Author: Solved in https://github.com/kinvolk/kubernetes-enhancements/pull/3/commits/e08023ce8794fa2e545d19a5d6aa41b538bad846.

Ephemeral volumes are associated to a **single** pod and their lifecyle is
dependent on that pod. These are `configMap`, `secret`, `emptyDir`,
`downwardAPI`, etc. These kind of volumes are easy to handle as they are not
shared by different pods and hence all the process accessig those volumes have
the same effective user and group IDs. Kubelet creates the files for those
volumes and it can easily set the file ownership too.

Non-ephemeral volumes more difficult to support since they can be persistent and
also can be shared by multiple pods. This proposal supports volumes with two
different strategies:
- The `Cluster` makes it easier for pods to share files using volumes when those
  don't have access permissions for `others` because the effective user and
  group IDs on the host are the same for all the pods.
- The semantics of semantics of `fsGroup` are respected, if it's specified it's
  assumed to be the correct GID in the host and an 1-to-1 mapping entry for the

>   `fsGroup` is added to the GID mappings for the pod.

Author: No, it's independent and also added for `Pod` mode.
The motivation is that a pod running in `Pod` mode is able to access the files in a volume if they are owned by `fsGroup`.

>   `fsGroup` is added to the GID mappings for the pod.

Reviewer 2: Ok, so `fsGroup: X` means a line like this is added: `X, X, 1` to the mapping file?

This might have security considerations to consider too, right? As long as we don't forget or are tracking them in some way, I'm fine :)

>   `fsGroup` is added to the GID mappings for the pod.

Reviewer 2: Marking as solved, but feel free to re-open if I'm missing something

>   `fsGroup` is added to the GID mappings for the pod.

Author: You're right, that line is added. `fsGroup` can already be controlled by the PSP, so users can control what's allowed there. We should make it clear on the documentation that this special entry in the mapping is added for this field.

that updates permissions and ownership of the files to be accesible by the
`fsGroup` group ID). These pods should be run in `Host` mode.

#### Container Runtime Support

- **Docker**:
  It only supports a [single ID
  mappings](https://docs.docker.com/engine/security/userns-remap/) shared by all
  containers running in the host. There is not support for [multiple ID
  mappings](https://github.com/moby/moby/issues/28593) yet. Dockershim runtime is
  only compatible with pods running in `Host` and `Cluster` modes. The user has
  to guarantee that the ID mappings configured in Docker through the
  `userns-remap` and the cluster-wide range configured in the Kubelet are the
  same. The dockershim implementation includes a check to verify that the IDs
  mapping received from the Kubelet are equal to the ones configured in Docker,
  returning an error otherwise.
- **containerd**:
  It's quite straigtforward to implement the CRI changes proposed below in
  containerd/cri, we did it in
  [this](https://github.com/kinvolk/containerd-cri/commits/mauricio/userns_poc)

>   PoC.

Author: I don't think so. That PR is outdated and doesn't include the CRI changes mentioned in this proposal. Maybe we could update that with the link I provided?

>   PoC.

Reviewer 4: You're right, and I forgot that the PR doesn't point to master but a release branch.

- **cri-o**:
  It recently [added](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/pull/3944) support for
  user namespaces through a pod annotation. The extensions to make it work with
  the current CRI changes are small.
- TODO(Mauricio): gVisor, katacontainers?

containerd and cri-o will provide support for the 3 possible values of `userNamespaceMode`.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Breaking Existing Workloads

Some features that could not work when the host user namespace is not shared are:

- **Some Capabilities**:
  The Linux kernel takes into consideration the user namespace a process is
  running in while performing the capabilities check. There are some
  capabilities that are only available in the root (host) user namespace such as
  `CAP_SYS_TIME`, `CAP_SYS_MODULE` & `CAP_MKNOD`.

- **Sharing Host Namespaces**:
  There are some limitations in the Linux kernel and in the runtimes that
  prevents sharing other host namespaces when the host user namespace is not

>   shared.

Reviewer 4: It's not about the processes in the container, but about runc failing to start the container (returning an error during the 'start' phase).

>   shared.

Author: It mean it's not possible to put a pod in a new user namespace while using (sharing) the host network, IPC or PID namespaces.

>   shared.

Reviewer 2: Ohh, now I follow, sorry :). I think I'd list some examples (like host network), but LGTM. I think maybe I was tired :D

  TODO(Mauricio): Put links to those limitations?

In order to avoid breaking existing workloads `Host` is the default value of `userNamespaceMode`.

#### Duplicated Snapshots of Container Images

The owners of the files of a container image have to been set accordingly to the
ID mappings used for that container. The runtimes perform a `chown` operation
over the image snapshot when it's pulled. This presents a risk as it potentially
increases the time and the storage needed to handle the container images.

There is not immediate mitigation for it, [we
talked](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/containers/2020-September/042230.html)
to the Linux kernel community and [they
replied](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/containers/2020-September/042230.html)
they are working on a solution for it.

Another risk is exausting the disk space on the nodes if pods are repeativily
started and stopped while using `Pod` mode. Since `Pod` mode is planned for
phase 2 we haven't considered a mitigation for this case.

## Implementation Phases

The implemenation of this KEP in a single phase is complicated as there are many

> discussions to be done. We learned from previous attempts to bring this support in

Author: I changed it (probably while you're reviewing), could you please check if what you meant is in this commit https://github.com/kinvolk/kubernetes-enhancements/pull/3/commits/19d29349c1d439c67a49d9137dc6a900a3f4a3af?

> discussions to be done. We learned from previous attempts to bring this support in

Reviewer 2: Yes, thanks!

avoid changing the implementation drastically in further phases.

This proposal implementation aims to be divided in the following phases:

### Phase 1

This first phase includes:
 - Extend the PodSpec with the `userNamespaceMode` field.
 - Extend the CRI with user and ID mappings fields.
 - Implement support for `Host` and `Cluster` user namespace modes.

The goal of this phase is to implement some initial user namespace support
providing pod-to-host isolation and supporting volumes. The implementation of
the `Pod` mode is out of scope in this phase because it requires a non
negligible amount of work and we could risk losing the focus failing to deliver
this feature.

### Phase 2

This phase aims to implement the `Pod` mode. After this phase is completed the
full advantanges of user namespaces could be used in some cases (stateless
workloads).

### Phase 2+

The default value of `userNamespaceMode` should be set to `Pod` so pods that
don't set this field can also get the security benefits of user namespaces. It's
not clear yet what should be the process to make this happen as this is a
potentially non backwards compatible change. It's specially relevant for

> workloads not compatible with user namespaces.

Author: I'm not sure I totally follow your comment. I have moved this to the "future part". A section with open points that we don't want to solve now.

> workloads not compatible with user namespaces.

Reviewer 2: Cool, thanks! :)

> workloads not compatible with user namespaces.

Reviewer 2: Cool, thanks!

- Extend the CRI to have a user namespace mode and the user and group ID mappings.
- Add a `userNamespaceMode` field to the pod spec.
- Add the cluster-wide ID mappings to the kubelet configuration file.
- Add a `UserNamespacesSupport` feature flag to enable / disable the user.
  namespaces support.
- Update owner of ephemeral volumes populated by the kubelet.

### PodSpec Changes

`v1.PodSpec` is extended with a new `UserNamesapceMode` field:

```
const (
	UserNamespaceModeHost    PodUserNamespaceMode = "Host"
	UserNamespaceModeCluster PodUserNamespaceMode = "Cluster"
	UserNamespaceModePod     PodUserNamespaceMode = "Pod"
)

type PodSpec struct {
...
  // UserNamespaceMode controls how user namespaces are used for this Pod.
  // Three modes are supported:
  // "Host": The pod shares the host user namespace. (default value).
  // "Cluster": The pod uses a cluster-wide configured ID mappings.
  // "Pod": The pod gets a non-overlapping ID mappings range.
  // +k8s:conversion-gen=false
  // +optional
  UserNamespaceMode PodUserNamespaceMode `json:"userNamespaceMode,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,36,opt  name=userNamespaceMode"`
...
```

### CRI API Changes

> The CRI has to be extended to allow kubelet to specify the user namespace mode

Reviewer 2: Just as an example of my previous comment. Something like this I think is clearer in general (I know in spanish it isn't, but in English I think it is :)):

```suggestion
The CRI is extended to (optionally) specify the user namespace mode
```

Author: Right. I'll do a pass improving the verb tense. It's a mix between present and future conditional now.

  are the same. The dockershim implementation includes a check to verify that
  the IDs mapping received from the Kubelet are equal to the ones configured in
  Docker, returning an error otherwise.
- **containerd**:
  It's quite straigtforward to implement the CRI changes proposed below in
  containerd/cri, we did it in
  [this](https://github.com/kinvolk/containerd-cri/commits/mauricio/userns_poc)
  PoC.
- **cri-o**:
  It recently [added](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/pull/3944) support for
  user namespaces through a pod annotation. The extensions to make it work with
  the current CRI changes are small.
- TODO(Mauricio): gVisor, katacontainers?

containerd and cri-o will provide support for the 3 possible values of `userNamespaceMode`.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Breaking Existing Workloads

Some features that could not work when the host user namespace is not shared are:

- **Some Capabilities**:
  The Linux kernel takes into consideration the user namespace a process is
  running in while performing the capabilities check. There are some
  capabilities that are only available in the root (host) user namespace such as

>   `CAP_SYS_TIME`, `CAP_SYS_MODULE` & `CAP_MKNOD`.

Author: Great! Do you have the link to the mknod discussions?

>   `CAP_SYS_TIME`, `CAP_SYS_MODULE` & `CAP_MKNOD`.

Reviewer 4: I am not sure what link to give. I see an old revert patch https://patchwork.kernel.org/patch/10509655/ which suggests the conversation is going back and forth. But I don't know the status today.

>   `CAP_SYS_TIME`, `CAP_SYS_MODULE` & `CAP_MKNOD`.

Author: I'd avoid including that link. It seems to me it's not that clear about the future intentions.

- **containerd**:
  It's quite straigtforward to implement the CRI changes proposed below in
  containerd/cri, we did it in
  [this](https://github.com/kinvolk/containerd-cri/commits/mauricio/userns_poc)
  PoC.
- **cri-o**:
  It recently [added](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/pull/3944) support for
  user namespaces through a pod annotation. The extensions to make it work with
  the current CRI changes are small.
- TODO(Mauricio): gVisor, katacontainers?

containerd and cri-o will provide support for the 3 possible values of `userNamespaceMode`.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Breaking Existing Workloads

Some features that could not work when the host user namespace is not shared are:

- **Some Capabilities**:
  The Linux kernel takes into consideration the user namespace a process is
  running in while performing the capabilities check. There are some
  capabilities that are only available in the root (host) user namespace such as
  `CAP_SYS_TIME`, `CAP_SYS_MODULE` & `CAP_MKNOD`.

- **Sharing Host Namespaces**:
  There are some limitations in the Linux kernel and in the runtimes that
  prevents sharing other host namespaces when the host user namespace is not
  shared.

>   TODO(Mauricio): Put links to those limitations?

Reviewer 4: I don't have links, but we could just mention them:
- Mounting mqueue (/dev/mqueue) is not allowed from a process in a user namespace that does not own the IPC namespace. Impact: pods with `hostIPC=true` and `userNamespaceMode=Pod|Cluster` can fail
- Mounting procfs (/proc) is not allowed from a process in a user namespace that does not own the PID namespace. Impact: pods with `hostPID=true` and `userNamespaceMode=Pod|Cluster` can fail
- Mounting sysfs (/sys) is not allowed from a process in a user namespace that does not own the network namespace. Impact: pods with `hostNetwork=true` and `userNamespaceMode=Pod|Cluster` can fail

Author: Done.

In order to avoid breaking existing workloads `Host` is the default value of `userNamespaceMode`.

#### Duplicated Snapshots of Container Images

The owners of the files of a container image have to been set accordingly to the

> ID mappings used for that container. The runtimes perform a `chown` operation

Reviewer 4: Could you give an example? For example, the directory `/root` in the container should be seen by user id 0. If the user id mapping maps the container user 0 to the host user 100000, then the `/root` directory will be owned by user id 100000, so it appears to belong to root in the container.

Author: Added with some rewording. Thanks!

> ID mappings used for that container. The runtimes perform a `chown` operation

Reviewer 4: The runtimes perform a `chown`
-> The current implementation in container runtimes is to recursively perform a `chown`

over the image snapshot when it's pulled. This presents a risk as it potentially
increases the time and the storage needed to handle the container images.

There is not immediate mitigation for it, [we
talked](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/containers/2020-September/042230.html)
to the Linux kernel community and [they
replied](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/containers/2020-September/042230.html)

> they are working on a solution for it.

Reviewer 4: You can add:
If the kernel provides a solution for this problem, that would be something that container runtime should use. It does not impact the Kubelet. Similarly, this does not impact the CRI gRPC spec.

ID mappings used for that container. For example, if the user 0 in the container
is mapped to the host user 100000, then the `/root` directory has to be owned by
user ID 100000 in the host, so it appears to belong to root in the container.
The current implementation in container runtimes is to recursively perform a
`chown` operation over the image snapshot when it's pulled. This presents a risk
as it potentially increases the time and the storage needed to handle the
container images.

There is not immediate mitigation for it, [we
talked](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/containers/2020-September/042230.html)
to the Linux kernel community and [they
replied](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/containers/2020-September/042230.html)
they are working on a solution for it. If the Linux kernel provides a solution
for this problem, that would be something that container runtimes should use. It
does not impact the kubelet nor the CRI gRPC spec.

If the Linux kernel provides a solution for this problem, that would be
something that container runtimes should use. It does not impact the kubelet nor

> the CRI gRPC spec.

Author: ops, no idea what happened there. Fixed.

  The list of such capabilities is likely to change from one Linux version to
  another. For example, Linux now has [time
  namespaces](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/time_namespaces.7.html) and
  there are ways to make `CAP_SYS_TIME` work inside a user namespace. There are
  also discussions to make `CAP_MKNOD` work in user namespaces.

- **Sharing Host Namespaces**:
  There are some limitations in the Linux kernel and in the runtimes that
  prevent sharing other host namespaces when the host user namespace is not
  shared.
  - Mounting `mqueue` (`/dev/mqueue`) is not allowed from a process in a user
    namespace that does not own the IPC namespace. Pods with `hostIPC=true` and
    `userNamespaceMode=Pod|Cluster` can fail.
  - Mounting `procfs` (`/proc`) is not allowed from a process in a user namespace
    that does not own the PID namespace. Pods with `hostPID=true` and
    `userNamespaceMode=Pod|Cluster` can fail.
  - Mounting `sysfs` (`/sys`) is not allowed from a process in a user namespace
    that does not own the network namespace. Impact: pods with
    `hostNetwork=true` and `userNamespaceMode=Pod|Cluster` can fail.

> In order to avoid breaking existing workloads `Host` is the default value of `userNamespaceMode`.

Reviewer 4: You could add:
if users specify `userNamespaceMode=Pod|Cluster` and one of these `host{IPC,IPC,Network}=true` options, runc will currently fail to start the container. The kubelet will not try to prevent that combination of options, in case runc or the kernel make it possible in the future to use that combination.
wdyt?

Author: I agree. Added.

CRI and kubelet so the runtimes can inform the kubelet what are the IDs present
on a specific container image.

## Implementation Phases

The implemenation of this KEP in a single phase is complicated as there are many
discussions to be done. We learned from previous attempts to bring this support in
that it should be done in small steps to avoid losing the focus on the
discussion. It's also true that a full plan should be agreed at the beginning to
avoid changing the implementation drastically in further phases.

This proposal implementation aims to be divided in the following phases:

### Phase 1

This first phase includes:
 - Extend the PodSpec with the `userNamespaceMode` field.
 - Extend the CRI with user and ID mappings fields.
 - Implement support for `Host` and `Cluster` user namespace modes.

The goal of this phase is to implement some initial user namespace support
providing pod-to-host isolation and supporting volumes. The implementation of
the `Pod` mode is out of scope in this phase because it requires a non
negligible amount of work and we could risk losing the focus failing to deliver
this feature.

### Future Phases

> These phase aims to implement the `Pod` mode. After this phase is completed the

Reviewer 4: Decide on singular or plural:
"These phases aim" or "This phase aims"
(ditto for section title and next sentences)

enhancement:
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to maintain previous behavior?
- What changes (in invocations, configurations, API use, etc.) is an existing
  cluster required to make on upgrade, in order to make use of the enhancement?
-->

### Version Skew Strategy

<!--
If applicable, how will the component handle version skew with other
components? What are the guarantees? Make sure this is in the test plan.

Consider the following in developing a version skew strategy for this
enhancement:
- Does this enhancement involve coordinating behavior in the control plane and
  in the kubelet? How does an n-2 kubelet without this feature available behave
  when this feature is used?
- Will any other components on the node change? For example, changes to CSI,
  CRI or CNI may require updating that component before the kubelet.
-->

The container runtime will have to be updated in the nodes to support this feature.

The new `user` field in the `NamespaceOption` will be ignored by an old runtime
without user namespaces support. The container will be placed in the host user

> namespace. It's a responsibility of the user to guarante that a runtime

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
namespace. It's a responsibility of the user to guarantee that a runtime
```

-->

Container security consists of many different kernel features that work together
to make containers secure. User namespaces isolate user and group IDs by
allowing processes to run with different IDs in the container and in the host.
Specially, a process running as privileged in a container can be
unprivileged in the host. This makes it possible to give more capabilities to the containers and
protects the host and other containers from malicious or compromised containers.

This KEP adds a new `userNamespaceMode` field  to `pod.Spec`. It allows users to
place pods in different user namespaces increasing the  pod-to-pod and
pod-to-host isolation. This extra isolation increases the cluster security as it
protects the host and other pods from malicious or compromised processes inside
containers that are able to break into the host. This KEP proposes three
different modes: `Host` keeps the current behaviour, `Cluster` uses the same
ID mapping for all the pods (very similar to the previous [Support Node-Level User
Namespaces
Remapping](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/design-proposals/node/node-usernamespace-remapping.md)

> proposal) and `Pod` increases pod-to-pod isolation.

Reviewer: We ccould say `Pod` attempts to give each pod a unique user namespace mapping.

Author: Right. I used  "different and non-overlapping" instead of "unique" in https://github.com/kinvolk/kubernetes-enhancements/pull/3/commits/c7cff4ff42e0ebe6079482f1547910472414bf01

this KEP.  Describe why the change is important and the benefits to users. The
motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

From [user_namespaces(7)](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/user_namespaces.7.html):
> User namespaces isolate security-related identifiers and attributes, in
particular, user IDs and group IDs, the root directory, keys, and capabilities.
A process's user and group IDs can be different inside and outside a user
namespace. In particular, a process can have a normal unprivileged user ID
outside a user namespace while at the same time having a user ID of 0 inside
the namespace; in other words, the process has full privileges for operations
inside the user namespace, but is unprivileged for operations outside the
namespace.

The goal of supporting user namespaces in Kubernetes is to be able to run
processes in pods with a different user and group IDs than in the host.
Specifically, a privileged process in the pod runs as an unprivileged process in the

> host. If such a process is able to break into the host, it'll have limited

Reviewer: `break out of the container to the host`

impact as it'll be running as an unprivileged user there.

The following security vulnerabilities are mitigated with
user namespaces and it is expected that using them would mitigate against some of the future vulnerabilities.
- CVE-2016-8867: Privilege escalation inside containers
  - https://github.com/moby/moby/issues/27590
- CVE-2018-15664: TOCTOU race attack that allows to read/write files in the host
  - https://github.com/moby/moby/pull/39252
- CVE-2019-5736: Host runc binary can be overwritten from container
  - https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/commit/0a8e4117e7f715d5fbeef398405813ce8e88558b

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

- Increase node to pod isolation in Kubernetes by mapping user and group IDs
  inside the container to different IDs in the host. In particular, mapping root
  inside the container to unprivileged user and group IDs in the node.

> - Make it possible to run workloads that need "dangerous" capabilities such as

Reviewer: `dangerous` -> `highly privileged` ?

  `CAP_SYS_ADMIN` without impacting the host.
- Benefit from the security hardening that user namespaces are expected to

>   provide against some of the future unknown runtime vulnerabilities.

Reviewer: `runtime and kernel` ?

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

- Provide a way to run the kubelet process or container runtimes as an
  unprivileged process. Although initiatives like
  [usernetes](https://github.com/rootless-containers/usernetes) and this KEP
  both make use of user namespaces, it is a different implementation for a
  different purpose.

> - Mounting volumes in pods with a user ID mapping. Although the authors of this

Reviewer: Aren't we going to support volumes with cluster mappings?

Author: I think it's referring to supporting a shiftfs or similar feature. I clarified it in https://github.com/kinvolk/kubernetes-enhancements/pull/3/commits/1825e647568ae297c5cb0d5d85ee5541c7d57e43.
@alban could you please confirm if that's what you wanted to mention?

Reviewer 4: Yes, that's what I meant. https://github.com/kinvolk/kubernetes-enhancements/commit/1825e647568ae297c5cb0d5d85ee5541c7d57e43 looks good to me

  container and in the host. This mode is intended for pods sharing volumes as
  they will run with the same effective IDs on the host, allowing them to read
  and write files in the shared storage.

- **Pod**:
  Each pod is placed in a different user namespace and has a different and
  non-overlapping ID mapping. This mode is intended for stateless pods, i.e.
  pods using only ephemeral volumes like `configMap,` `downwardAPI`, `secret`,
  `projected` and `emptyDir`. This mode not only provides host-to-pod isolation
  but also  pod-to-pod isolation as each pod has a different range of effective
  IDs in the host.

### User Stories

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

As a cluster admin, I want run some pods with privileged capabilities because
the applications in the pods require it (e.g. `CAP_SYS_ADMIN` to mount a FUSE
filesystem or `CAP_NET_ADMIN` to setup a VPN) but I don't want this extra

> capability to give any extra privilege on the host.

Reviewer: `give any` -> `grant me any` ?

strategies:
- The `Cluster` makes it easier for pods to share files using volumes when those
  don't have access permissions for `others` because the effective user and
  group IDs on the host are the same for all the pods.
- The semantics of semantics of `fsGroup` are respected, if it's specified it's
  assumed to be the correct GID in the host and a 1-to-1 mapping entry for the
  `fsGroup` is added to the GID mappings for the pod.

This KEP doesn't impose any restriction on the different volumes and
`userNamespaceMode` combinations and leaves it to users to chose the correct
combinations based on their specific needs.

There are some cases that require special attention from the user. For instance,
a process inside a pod will not be able to access files with mode `0700` and
owned by a user different than the effective user of that process in a volume
that doesn't support the semantics of `fsGroup` (doesn't support
[`SetVolumeOwnership`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/00da04ba23d755d02a78d5021996489ace96aa4d/pkg/volume/volume_linux.go#L42)
that updates permissions and ownership of the files to be accesible by the

> `fsGroup` group ID). These pods should be run in `Host` mode.

Reviewer: These -> Such
